talk more about this in a moment we've
got to go back to the GCC Summit the
gulf cooperation Council where president
erdogan of Turkey he's preparing to
speak let's listen GCC
Summit this is a reflection of the close
relations between the GCC member states
and the Republic of Turkey adding
further dimensions and taking these
relations to higher levels political
security and cultural to the best
interest of our respective people hoping
that the summit will achieve its desired
goals thank
you it is with pleasure I give the floor
to my brother his Excellency president
of Turkey rajab t
erdogan
your majesties your Royal highnesses
your excellencies Mr Secretary
General I salute you
with respect and appreciation may God's
peace and blessings be with
you it is with pleasure that I take
part in the 44th GCC Summit and to be
among you here today I extend all thanks
and appreciation to my
brother she tamim the air of qar as a
guest of
honor our relations with the GCC member
states is taking new levels day after
day and my presence here today
epitomizes our mutual will and I am
certain that we
can cement these relations by joining
hands
and hearts as well the volume of trade
between turkey and The JCC
countries has
increased 13
fold coming to $23
billion it is very important
to also have the free trade agreement
between turkey and J CCC member states
come into
effect it is also with pleasure to see
Tura a tourist destination to all the
GCC
citizens
five ministerial meetings on the
Strategic dialogue were
convened and we hope that the
six one will be convened on the first
quarter of
2024 in turkey as a host country we pay
great attention to the projects and
Enterprises on Transportation roads and
networks which connect the GCC member
States to Europe
and we can continue to develop our
relations in the energy
domain turkey has become a safe haven
for international and GCC
Investments and we have witnessed very
significant development in terms of
security and
confidence in investment also the
Turkish military industrial
stresses the significance of this
cooperation that's why it is imperative
to continue to diversify our aspects and
domains of cooperation my brothers and
Friends during the ex extraordinary
Summit
convened in
Riyad uh between the organization of
Islamic conference and the league of
Arab states we all touch the
significance of cooperation and
solidarity our talks on
Gaza was very significant towards a
joint action and it is very important to
continue to Monitor and follow up with
the decisions and resolutions handed
down during that
Summit similarly and equally enough the
uh ministerial council's efforts are
also important we also commend the
mediation efforts played by the state of
qar for the truth and swap of detes and
captives we had hoped that the ceasefire
would be have been permanent as nyaho is
gambling with the
entire Region's future for his own
political
calculations the killing of
women and
children as
177,000 unarmed innocent civilians were
killed this constitutes a war crime and
Israel must be penalized and held to
account for these crimes turkey extended
the necessary relief Aid to Gaza through
12 cargo planes we
also procured number of Gaz and patients
and wounded including cancer patients
our goal is to have a permanent
ceasefire
established and an independent
Palestinian sovereign state be
established on the 1967 border with East
Jerusalem as its capital and within this
context and towards this end we are
prepared as explained to all the states
including the regional
states that this should be included
among the options as we are prepared to
act as a guarantor
State this Injustice cannot
continue with in relation to Syria and
to restore security there which the pkk
and pyg act terrorist activities cannot
be resumed at this region it is that
these activities that undermine our
efforts towards peace and
security
we aim towards finding a diplomatic
solution in Syria on the basis of the UN
resolution
2254 we must provide a solid ground
in these terms we also work towards the
return the voluntarily return of Syrian
refugees we together with other
stakeholders we pay also close attention
to the proceedings of the GCC
Summit in terms
of reinforcing the constit institutional
foundations as the Strategic partnership
with the GCC member states will provide
New Horizons to the member
states we also aim
towards reinforcing and expanding our
relations in terms of the Strategic
cooperation by this I conclude wishing
you all the
success
I thank my brother his Excellency
president re erogan for his
message uh in the conclusion of the
proceeding of this Summit I reiterate my
appreciation to you for taking part and
I
extend uh I express my pleasure for the
brotherly State uh atmosphere and
understanding in the discussion and the
wisdom in drafting the resolution handed
down which I hope will contribute to the
prosperity and Welfare of our respective
States and peoples serving to the causes
of our Arab and Muslim Nation I also
extend all thanks and appreciation to
the members of the delegations and the
Secretary General and all the staff of
the Secretary General for their
concerted effort during this Edition and
to conclude I reiterate our welcoming to
you all among your brothers in your
second Homeland hoping to meet with you
in the upcoming Summit praying to God
Almighty to save
you and guide us toward the best
interest and the welfare of our peoples
thank
you proceedings
concluded well you were listening to
concluding comments there uh by the air
of Qatar after speeches given by leaders
attending the gulf cooperation Council
uh Summit here in Doha a moment before
we heard from tur's president RB t
erdogan uh with his thoughts on events
in Gaza of course high on the agenda
there Netanyahu gambling he said with
the future of the entire region for his
own political calculations calling for
Israel to be penalized for war crimes
for immediate ceasefire and for uh a
return to talks towards a permanent
Palestinian State our diplomatic editor
James baz was listening in he there
indeed at the summit uh he joins us live
James what does turkey bring to
precedings well I think it is important
that you had the president of turkia
talking and the Amir of Qatar talking um
because they were very strong in their
condemnation of Israel's bombardment of
Gaza uh it's interesting that some of
the other members of the gulf
cooperation Council although their their
position as members of the Arab League
um and the organization of Islamic
cooperation is that they want a
permanent ceasefire and they condemn
Israel's actions some of them I think
probably would have been a little bit
more muted in their criticism of Israel
in a public setting and that's because
you've got to look at the different
nations that make up the cooperation
Council some of them have very different
uh backdrops to their relations with
Israel uh you had during the Trump
Administration uh the Abraham Accords
that were signed and that includes the
United Arab Emirates and Bahrain they
have normalization deals with Israel and
despite what has happened in the last
couple of months and despite what we're
seeing even now in Gaza they have not
dropped their diplomatic relations uh
with Israel they've just condemned uh
its actions and remember Saudi Arabia
was also very close um to signing one of
those normalization deals prime minister
Netanyahu telling the UN General
Assembly in New York in September they
were on the cusp of a historic deal of
course that deal never got signed and
it's certainly on hold right now but I
think for some of the GCC countries this
is a little bit more complicated than it
is uh for Qatar and for Tura which is
here obviously not a member of the gulf
cooperation Council not a country in the
Gulf but an important Regional player
invited as the VIP guest for this annual
Summit of the GCC the way it works in
this organization is you have your
annual Summit at the beginning and then
you have a year as the chair so katar is
the chair of the GCC for the next year
and then there'll be a summit in Kuwait
when Kuwait takes over the chairmanship
next year okay James thanks for that
James be our diplomatic editor at the
GCC Summit and let's uh cut back now to
Sammy Hermes who is still here with me
on Set uh he's an associate professor at
Northwestern University in Qatar and
Samy I just want to pick up on what
James was saying there Qatar and turkey
are speaking strongly in condemnation of
Israel's actions all of these countries
are united in wanting to see a permanent
ceasefire but some of them perhaps more
muted in their public criticisms because
of their individual ongoing relations
with Israel so this is a body that
speaks with one voice but not
necessarily with great
force yes indeed and I think uh at this
point we'd have to sort of wait and see
what the final uh declaration that comes
out of this uh Summit is uh they're uh
they're able you know in fact I I
thought uh turus president was uh could
have been stronger he's used much more
eviscerating language in the past in the
past exactly and so I I was a bit uh
sort of unimpressed or uh surprised yeah
um but these are you know the public
pronouncements let's see what uh what
comes out with the Declaration uh but
you know I think we were talking earlier
uh if you don't mind sort of going back
to the I was going to as well um the I
think what needs to happen alongside
these diplomatic Maneuvers is is global
public pressure uh what you saw after
the during the pause naturally people
are sort of an await Andy and then the
bombing escalates but people need time
to sort of take back to the streets and
react but you're seeing that again uh in
Western capitals there's actions being
taken protests um and I think you know
what I was saying earlier is that the
BDS movement boycott divestment
sanctions is an important part of this
uh this Global pressure because it's
through one through that that people get
educated it's through that that we call
for mil milary embargo for example and
we've seen uh unions in Italy and Greece
uh I think in Belgium refuse to uh sort
of unload or uh to uh sort of uh send uh
um unload or sort of what's the to
supply ships with with arms so we've
seen some of that taking place and we
need to see more of that um and it needs
to get obviously up to the level of sort
of political political action um but I
think that the sort of um you know these
boycotts also from the Arab world right
we haven't seen uh Arab governments take
these sort of positions and so you need
more public pressure it's there but it's
not this kind of critical mass um and
you know one last thing i' I'd like to
say is sort of the in Western capitals
what you've seen are uh Jewish allies
right who have uh stormed uh capital and
and occupied uh spaces the Senators
offices and so on who have really kind
of put the sort of anti-zionist agenda
on the table and have been allies of
Palestinians and I think that is really
important in shifting public discourse
shifting political discourse in the US
especially Sammy thanks for your
thoughts great to hear them